A land once devastated by American
bombing
now accounts for half of Nike's global
shoe production. Hundreds of other
American companies and their suppliers
have manufacturing bases in Vietnam,
too. As a Southeast Asian country's
annual GDP climbed, exports to the US
grew. Now, Vietnam is one of the
countries most dependent on American
trade. The United States is Vietnam's
largest export market. Vietnam's massive
trade surplus with the US has made it a
key target for Donald Trump.
The problem is they charge us 90%, we're
going to charge them 46% tariff.
If Vietnam were to lose access to the
American market, that would have a
profound effect. it would ripple across
the economy,
which is why this was imperative for the
Vietnamese government.
President Trump says he's reached a
trade deal with Vietnam following weeks
of intense diplomacy between the two
nations.
Unlike military conflicts, trade wars
are at least fought without bloodshed.
But they can still do damage. And even
with a deal, the economic relationship
between the US and Vietnam faces an
uncertain future.
[Music]
Manufacturing is the lifeblood of modern
Vietnam.
It is now uh a major player in the
global supply chain. It is making
everything from Apple iPads to Samsung
smartphones, Nike shoes.
But Nike is just one of a long list of
apparel companies manufacturing in
Vietnam. Lululemon, Adidas, Abberrombi,
and others source huge percentages of
their products here.
Since the turn of the millennium, global
brands have reshaped the appearance of
provinces like Dumai, where clusters of
factories now produce and export
everything from t-shirts to specialized
machine parts.
Exports in general represent about 90%
of um GDP. It's absolutely critical for
the growth of the economy of lifting
people out of poverty.
And after the last American troops
withdrew in 1973,
there was a lot of that.
Postwar Vietnam was one of the world's
poorest countries. It had been drained
of resources after years and years of
war.
Vietnam suffered significantly under
collectivism in the 80s and because of
the fall of the Soviet Union. at the
same time and bad economic policy. It
had to reform. The government began to
relax its control of the economy and
created policies to attract foreign
investors.
That included tax incentives, building
out the right infrastructure that these
companies wanted and generally having a
very open attitude to global
manufacturers looking at Vietnam.
Bolstered by the country's cheap,
hard-working, relatively young, and
educated labor force, as well as
political stability and proximity to
China, the strategy worked. More than
$600 billion of foreign investment has
flowed in since 1988. Exports have
surged and, as we've heard, now make up
about 90% of the country's GDP. As much
as 30% of those land in the US, making
America's trade deficit with Vietnam its
third largest by country, behind only
China and Mexico. And that imbalance has
only grown since the first Trump
administration, in part due to policies
enacted then. During Trump 1.0, Vietnam
emerged as the biggest winner of US
China tensions. Vietnam became a place
that investors gravitated towards to tap
into the US market where the arbitrage
between tariffs in China versus Vietnam
became wider. This was part of a hedging
strategy known as China plus one where
companies began relocating some
production to Vietnam to avoid tariffs
slammed on Chinese goods. A good example
could be footwear where the global
economy continues to depend on China.
Vietnam is a key alternative to that.
Jung Min Koy is a manager at Yongqeng
Wooden Industries which makes and
exports wood furniture to the US. He
remembers the impact of Trump 1.0. Well,
logo
Trump 2.0 is very different in that
instead of targeting China alone, which
Vietnam benefited from, we now seeing
tariffs on Vietnam itself. Vietnam's
government anticipated some sort of
tariff from the Trump White House. They
did not anticipate a 46%
tariff. They were shocked to put it
bluntly.
Liberation day.
The impact of the announcement was
immediate.
he says. Now that's down to as few as
100 containers a month because of
reduced demand. This will likely have a
ripple effect on communities around
manufacturing hubs.
You could see factories laying off
workers. You could see plants perhaps
shutting down. Vietnam isn't alone in
facing these effects. What sets it apart
is the potential scale of them. It's one
reason the government has responded so
proactively.
They were one of the first governments
to reach out to the White House and say,
"Hey, let's start talking." The
officials have repeatedly said, "We will
buy very big ticket US products such as
aircraft, LG, uh anything that will help
reduce the trade gap." The tactic
appeared to work with Trump announcing
the two sides had reached an agreement
giving full market access to American
companies while slapping a 20% tariff on
all Vietnamese imports.
One of the biggest sticking points in
negotiations was a US demand for Vietnam
to get tougher on trade fraud and do
more to prevent Chinese goods being
rerouted and repackaged through Vietnam
to skirt higher tariffs.
And that's exceedingly difficult for
Vietnam because so many of the factories
here, they rely not just on components,
not just on material, but they rely on
machinery that comes from countries like
uh China.
It's like asking Mexico to stop having a
trade relationship with the United
States. While the US is the biggest
market for Vietnam, China is his most
important geopolitical consideration.
China sits on top of Vietnam. has a very
complicated relationship. The last war
that both countries fought was actually
against each other. That is the
relationship it has to be most delicate
about and is the forefront of its
consideration in foreign relations. Over
the years, Vietnam has been able to
navigate tensions between the US and
China through a strategy known as bamboo
diplomacy.
Vietnam, like a bamboo, knows how to
bend in the wind, so to speak. So when
the winds are shifting, it knows how to
shift along with it. They have learned
how to dance between these big giant
between Washington and Beijing. Vietnam
must now repeat the feat, managing
relations with two competing superpowers
while preserving its export reliant
growth model. targeted measures are
possible and that is where Vietnam can
find its sweet spot in order to appease
the US but at the same time maintain its
key relationship with China.
[Music]